---
title: "Python: Simplex Algorithm Software"
date: 2023-05-05
tags: [Python, Operations Research, Linear Programming]
excerpt: "Construct an interactive simplex algorithm to solve problems in linear programming"
mathjax: true
---

## Background
Operations research is a broad field of study with connections to various subjects like linear algebra, graph theory, and combinatorics. Operations research is commonly associated with problems regarding optimization, such as the optimization of production schedules or resource allocation for a buisness. Many of these problems can be modeled using linear constraints and descriptive variables. The simplex algorithm is a commonly used method when solving these types of linear programming problems. It requires that the original problem be written in a *standard form* with non-negative variables and linear constraints. An *initial tableau* or matrix can then be constructed for the algorithm to operate on. The algorithm itself runs a series of *pivot operations* on cells within each tableau iteration. Pivoting requires the preformance of elementary row operations within the tableau to obtain a *pivot cell*. The simplex algorithm runs until there are no more appropriate cells to pivot, which will of course vary depending on the type of optimization and magnitude of the problem.

This software was programmed in Python using Replit. Public links to two versions of this software are posted on the UNC Charlotte Pages website for students in future operations research courses to use. This site can be found [here](https://pages.charlotte.edu/lpsolve/).

## Code

To begin programming an interactive simplex algorithm, the user must be prompted for inputs that record the dimensions of the initial tableau, the column (variable) names, and row entries (variable coefficients). Input-validation features are integrated throughout the program as well to ensure no user-errors.

```python
import re

# Step 1: Get the dimensions of the matrix from the user
while True:
    try:
        num_rows = int(input("Enter the number of rows: "))
        num_cols = int(input("Enter the number of columns: "))
        break
    except ValueError:
        print("Invalid input. Please enter an integer value.")
```
